1) Fault domain and update domain

Fault Domain - 
In Fault domain Azure will set up VMs in to two different racks so that if the network, power, etc. failed, then only one rack will be affected.

Update Domain - 
In Update Domain Azure will set up vms in to two different racks. If azure will update their software and os for security reason so our vms will be accessable from other racks.


2) Availability Zones and Availability Sets

Availability Zone:
An Availability Zone is a physically separate zone, within an Azure region. There are three Availability Zones per supported Azure region.
Microsoft provide 99.99% SLA

Avalability Sets :
Availability Set ensures that the Azure virtual machines are deployed across multiple isolated racks in single data center.for high availability. So we can save our virtual machines from Unplanned Hardware maintenance Event, Unexpected Downtime, and Planned maintenance event.
If two virtaul machine running in same avalability set Microsoft provide 99.95% SLA.
For any Single Instance Virtual Machine using premium storage for all disks, Azure guarantees you will have Virtual Machine Connectivity of at least 99.9%.


SLA	Downtime per week		Downtime per month	Downtime per year
99%	1.68 hours		7.2 hours			3.65 days
99.9%	10.1 minutes		43.2 minutes		8.76 hours
99.95%	5 minutes			21.6 minutes		4.38 hours
99.99%	1.01 minutes		4.32 minutes		52.56 minutes
99.999%	6 seconds			25.9 seconds		5.26 minutes



pricing ---> In availabiltiy zone it will be double of availability set

LRS and GRS == GRS price will be double of LRS price


3-Internal error occur(NLA), (Brute force attack), (Blue and black screen)
We cannot take rdp. In this error most of time if unknown person trying to access our vm. So for security reason this error occure. So we need to go in run cmd ---> Disable NLA (Network Level Authentication) ---> Then try to access your vm. 
eventlog -->  4625- EVENT VIEWR

4-Disk Encryption
We use for security. But microsoft by default do disk encryption. If we do manually the we use 
The asymmetric key (RSA 2048) that you can use to protect or wrap the secret. You can provide a hardware security module (HSM)-protected key or software-protected key.

5- Monitoring tool (Azure performance diagnostic and metrics, activity log)
We use azure monitoring tools for monitoring.  by the help of azure metrics and log Analytics and by the help of network watcher. 

6- How to set alert
for example vm -
Alert --> Create new alert rule --> Select resource --> Add Condition (Activity log -- VM create , delete, reboot,restart)
Metric ( cpu, memory )
Add action group. notification (email and name alert)
Add rules details 

7- Disk types
- ultra disk 
- standard ssd
- Premium SSd
- Standard HDD

8 - Azure AD and AD connect
Azure AD -
The Azure Active Directory (Azure AD) enterprise identity service provides single sign-on and multi-factor authentication to help protect your users from 99.9 percent of cybersecurity attacks.

AD connect
Integrating your on-premises directories with Azure AD makes your users more productive by providing a common identity for accessing both cloud and on-premises resources. 


9- Blob storage -
Azure Blob storage is Microsoft's object storage solution for the cloud. Blob storage is optimized for storing massive amounts of unstructured data. Unstructured data is data that doesn't adhere to a particular data model or definition, such as text or binary data.

Azure Storage supports three types of blobs:
Block blobs:-
Block blobs store text and binary data. Block blobs are made up of blocks of data that can be managed individually. Block blobs can store up to about 190.7 TiB.

Append blobs:
Append blobs are made up of blocks like block blobs, but are optimized for append operations. Append blobs are ideal for scenarios such as logging data from virtual machines.

Page blobs:
Page blobs store random access files up to 8 TiB in size. Page blobs store virtual hard drive (VHD) files and serve as disks for Azure virtual machines. 

10 - LRS and GRS different 

11-
Azure Storage services:

Azure Blobs: A massively scalable object store for text and binary data. Also includes support for big data analytics through Data Lake Storage Gen2.
Azure Files: Managed file shares for cloud or on-premises deployments.
Azure Queues: A messaging store for reliable messaging between application components.
Azure Tables: A NoSQL store for schemaless storage of structured data.
Azure Disks: Block-level storage volumes for Azure VMs.

https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/common/storage-introduction


12 - Storage type 
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/common/storage-account-overview
i) Standard general-purpose v2
ii) Premium block blobs3
iii) Premium file shares3
iv) Premium page blobs3


13) Boot diagnostic - We use boot diagnostic for troubleshooting of VM. Boot diagnostic help with Vm current status Screen shot and with serial log.

14)log anlaytics ( basic language) Kusto query language


15) WVD technology
Virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI) is a technology that refers to the use of virtual machines to provide and manage virtual desktops

16) What is load balancer and application gateway, traffic manager.

Load Balancer ->
Azure loadbalnacer work on OSI Layer 4. it distributes traffic evenly in backend pools. It work on TCP and UDP protocol and source IP, Destination Ip, Source port number, destination Port number, Protocol. And continously monitor backend instance health.  

Azure offer two type of load balancer.
A public load balancer can provide outbound connections for virtual machines (VMs) inside your virtual network. These connections are accomplished by translating their private IP addresses to public IP addresses. Public Load Balancers are used to load balance internet traffic to your VMs.

An internal (or private) load balancer is used where private IPs are needed at the frontend only. Internal load balancers are used to load balance traffic inside a virtual network. A load balancer frontend can be accessed from an on-premises network in a hybrid scenario.

Application Gateway --> 
Azure Application Gateway is a web traffic load balancer that enables you to manage traffic to your web applications. it work on layer OSI layer 7. It Provide Url base route filtering. It work on Http and Https protocol. 
i)  URL-based routing
ii) Multiple-site hosting
ii) Redirection
iv) Web Application Firewall

Traffic manager --
Azure Traffic Manager is a DNS-based traffic load balancer. This service allows you to distribute traffic to your public facing applications across the global Azure regions.Traffic Manager uses DNS to direct the client requests to the appropriate service endpoint based on a traffic-routing method. Traffic manager also provides health monitoring for every endpoint. 

Azure Front Door :-
Azure Front Door is a global, scalable entry-point that uses the Microsoft global edge network to create fast, secure, and widely scalable web applications. With Front Door, you can transform your global consumer and enterprise applications into robust, high-performing personalized modern applications with contents that reach a global audience through Azure.
Front Door works at Layer 7 (HTTP/HTTPS layer) using anycast protocol with split TCP and Microsoft's global network to improve global connectivity.

17) What is soft delete?
If soft delete is enable, Microsoft will store our data for 80 days Retention period.During the retention period, you can restore a soft-deleted object to its state at the time it was deleted. After the retention period has expired, the object is permanently deleted.

18) Which option you will choose the Availability set and Availability zone and why?
It depends on customer requirement. If customer need application highly available and customer wants to invest then we can choose Availability zone. If customer has limited budget then and customer need application highly available the we can go with availability set. It overall depends on customer requirement.

19) NSG associate ?
VM NIC and Subnet.
VM Nic - If NSG is attach with a vm NIC so rules will be apply on that particular vm.
Subnet - If NSG is attach with subnet. The NSG rules will be applicable for All the VM's Under that subnet.

20) NSG and firewall ?
Network security groups provide distributed network layer traffic filtering to limit traffic to resources within virtual networks in each subscription. Azure Firewall is a fully stateful, centralized network firewall as-a-service, which provides network- and application-level protection across different subscriptions and virtual networks.

( NSG is like a basic firewall with limited feature and apply on limited resource within network in a subscription.
In NSG we can allow and block port number and ip address. 
And firewall provide application-level protection across multiple virtual network and subscription. 
In firewall we can also block url. )

21) Network Watcher - 
Azure Network Watcher provides tools to monitor, diagnose, view metrics, and enable or disable logs for resources in an Azure virtual network. Network Watcher is designed to monitor and repair the network health of IaaS (Infrastructure-as-a-Service) products which includes Virtual Machines, Virtual Networks, Application Gateways, Load balancers, etc. Note: It is not intended for and will not work for PaaS monitoring or Web analytics.


22) How to move existing vm in Availability set?
We cann't move existing vm in availability set. At the time of vm creation we can choose availability option.
But if you want than create OS disk snapshot and create new vm from this snapshot.

23) How to capture snapshot?
Select disk and create snapshot

24) How to create vm from a disk image?
disk should be OS disk --> Click on disk and select create option


25) Difference b/w Snapshot and Image?
A snapshot reflects the contents of a persistent disk in a concrete instant in time. An image is the same thing, but includes an operating system and boot loader and can be used to boot an instance.

By snapshot you can create disk. But by image you can create a new vm.


26) not able to stop running machine (Unknown error)
 wait for 30minutes. if you don't want to wait you can redeploy. this is happen when your vm is not in availability set.
Configure in availability set.

27) What kind of work you have done in Active Directory?
I have worked on AD, work like, Creating user, changing user password and creating and managing group. 



28) How to take image of vm. 
Use -- Sysprep 
Go inside the vm,
open Cmd as administrator ---> 
change directory - cd C:/windows/system32/sysprep

run cmd -  sysprep.exe
 select - Generalize check box
and select shutdown

then capture the image of vm and create image


29) what are default rules of NSG.
Inbound
65000 - AllowvnetInBound
65001 - AllowAzureLoadbalancer
65500- DenyAllInBound

Outbound

65000 - AllowVnetOutBound
65001 - AllowInternetOutBound
65500 DenyAllOutBound


30- How to increase disk size (step by step)
Go in VM---> Disk ---> Select disk ---> Remove the from vm--->
go in disk ---> select disk---> size&performance ---> change the size ---> Attach with vm ---> Go inside the vm select volume --> and extend the volume

31- How to decrease the disk size.?
Azure don't allow to decrease disk size. 

32- How to create basic DDods protection
 Basic DDods protection is default enable don't need to do anything.


33- What is containerization ?
Containerization is the packaging together of software code with all it’s necessary components like libraries, frameworks, and other dependencies so that they are isolated in their own “container.”
Containers are lightweight, portable, and highly conducive to automation.


34) what is role in azure.?
In Azure, a Cloud Service Role is a collection of managed, load-balanced, Platform-as-a-Service virtual machines that work together to perform common tasks. Cloud Service Roles are managed by Azure fabric controller and provide the ultimate combination of scalability, control, and customization.

35) How many roles in azureweb app?
Webapp roles --> Web Role is a Cloud Service role in Azure that is configured and customized to run web applications developed on programming languages/technologies that are supported by Internet Information Services (IIS), such as ASP.NET, PHP, Windows Communication Foundation and Fast CGI.

Worker Role --> Worker Role is any role in Azure that runs applications and services level tasks, which generally do not require IIS. In Worker Roles, IIS is not installed by default. They are mainly used to perform supporting background processes along with Web Roles and do tasks such as automatically compressing uploaded images, run scripts when something changes in the database, get new messages from queue and process and more.

36) What is manage identity in azure ?
Managed identities provide an identity for applications to use when connecting to resources that support Azure Active Directory (Azure AD) authentication. Applications may use the managed identity to obtain Azure AD tokens.
	i) System-assigned --> Some Azure services allow you to enable a managed identity directly on a service instance. When you enable a system-assigned managed identity an identity is created in Azure AD that is tied to the lifecycle of that service instance. So when the resource is deleted, Azure automatically deletes the identity for you.

	ii) User-assigned --> You may also create a managed identity as a standalone Azure resource. You can create a user-assigned managed identity and assign it to one or more instances of an Azure service. In the case of user-assigned managed identities, the identity is managed separately from the resources that use it.

